---
sidebar_position: 0700
title: v0.13 upgrade guide
toc_max_heading_level: 2
---

# v0.13 upgrade guide

## High impacts changes

- [Actions: `oneOrCurrent` has been renamed to `current`](#actions-oneorcurrent-has-been-renamed-to-current)
- [Models: `hasMany` and `hasOne` factories signatures changed](#models-hasmany-and-hasone-factories-signatures-changed)
- [Actions: eager and lazy loading changes](#actions-eager-and-lazy-loading-changes)
- [Models: `extend` and `configure` static methods are removed from models](#models-extend-and-configure-static-methods-are-removed-from-models)
- [Actions: `ExpectedRunFailureError` has been renamed to `RecordNotFoundError`](#actions-expectedrunfailureerror-has-been-renamed-to-recordnotfounderror)
- [Actions: builder pattern calls and actions extensions are removed](#actions-builder-pattern-calls-and-actions-extensions-are-removed)
- [Common: dependencies types and other types have been renamed](#common-dependencies-types-and-other-types-have-been-renamed)
- [Common: dependencies factories functions signature changed](#common-dependencies-factories-functions-signature-changed)
- [HTTP: transformers replaced with middlewares](#http-transformers-replaced-with-middlewares)

## Medium impacts changes

- [Actions: hook events now provide action instead of context](#actions-hooks-events-now-provide-action-instead-of-context)
- [Models: properties definition are now defined using factories](#models-properties-definition-are-now-defined-using-factories)
- [Common: internal APIs are now tagged and may have changed](#common-internal-apis-are-now-tagged-and-may-have-changed)

## Low impacts changes

- [Models: custom transformers must use `makeCustomTransformer`](#models-custom-transformers-must-use-makecustomtransformer)
- [Actions: `makeRefsCache` manager is replaced by references factories](#actions-makerefscache-manager-is-replaced-by-references-factories)

## Upgrading to v0.13 from v0.12

### Actions: `oneOrCurrent` has been renamed to `current`

**Likelihood Of Impact: High**

`oneOrCurrent` had an incorrect behavior of returning the current instance
on a not found error (such as 404 responses). This behavior has been corrected
and the runner has been renamed to `current` to avoid confusion with `one` and
other similar runners.

You must replace this runner's name if you are using it:

```typescript
// highlight.deletion
import { oneOrCurrent, save } from '@foscia/core';
// highlight.addition
import { current, save } from '@foscia/core';

const post = await action(
  save(myPost),
// highlight.deletion
  oneOrCurrent(),
// highlight.addition
  current(),
);
```

### Models: `hasMany` and `hasOne` factories signatures changed

**Likelihood Of Impact: High**

Thanks to the new relation factories signature, you can now define your
relations without calling `.config()` modifier, which has been removed.

Due to the new relations inclusion resolution, you are now required to define
the related types for each relation.

```typescript
export default class Post extends makeModel('posts', {
// highlight.deletion
  comments: hasMany<Comment[]>().config('comments'),
// highlight.addition
  comments: hasMany<Comment[]>('comments'),
// highlight.deletion
  author: hasOne(() => User).config({ path: 'author' }),
// highlight.addition
  author: hasOne(() => User, { path: 'author' }),
}) {}
```

### Actions: eager and lazy loading changes

**Likelihood Of Impact: High**

In this new version, eager and lazy loading was made fully generic. This offers
more capabilities for eager and lazy loading, such as code sharing or
multi-connection support.

As a consequence, eager loading through adapters and loaders factories for lazy
loading are removed. To support those two features, you must configure a
relations loader in your action factory:

```typescript
// highlight.addition
import { makeLoader, makeSimpleLazyLoader } from '@foscia/core';
// highlight.addition
import { makeJsonApiEagerLoader } from '@foscia/jsonapi';
// highlight.addition
import { makeRestEagerLoader } from '@foscia/rest';

export default makeActionFactory({
// With JSON:API.
// highlight.addition
  ...makeLoader({
// highlight.addition
    eagerLoader: makeJsonApiEagerLoader(),
// highlight.addition
    lazyLoader: makeSimpleLazyLoader(),
// highlight.addition
  }),
// With REST.
// highlight.addition
  ...makeLoader({
// highlight.addition
    eagerLoader: makeRestEagerLoader({ param: 'include' }),
// highlight.addition
    lazyLoader: makeSimpleLazyLoader(),
// highlight.addition
  }),
});
```

Your loaders should be removed, and you should use `load` or `loadMissing`
utilities.

### Models: `extend` and `configure` static methods are removed from models

**Likelihood Of Impact: High**

Because `extend` was not strict typing the returned class for prototype
inheritance and `configure` could be misunderstood as a current model
configuration utility while it creates a new model, those two functions have
been removed from models.

You must replace `extend` calls by creating common composables and replace
`configure` calls by passing configuration object directly to `makeModel`.

### Actions: `ExpectedRunFailureError` has been renamed to `RecordNotFoundError`

**Likelihood Of Impact: High**

In order to improve error names meaning, the error thrown when `oneOrFail` and
`cachedOrFail` cannot found a record (not found response from adapter or no data
to deserialize) has been renamed to `RecordNotFoundError`.

You must replace this error's name if you are catching/throwing it:

```typescript
// highlight.deletion
import { ExpectedRunFailureError, oneOrFail, query } from '@foscia/core';
// highlight.addition
import { RecordNotFoundError, oneOrFail, query } from '@foscia/core';

try {
  const post = await action(
    query(Post, 1),
    oneOrFail(),
  );
} catch (error) {
// highlight.deletion
  if (error instanceof ExpectedRunFailureError) {
// highlight.addition
  if (error instanceof RecordNotFoundError) {
    // redirect to 404
  }
}
```

### Actions: builder pattern calls and actions extensions are removed

**Likelihood Of Impact: High**

Since its first release, Foscia provided the "builder pattern calls" through
actions' extensions. This feature allowed users to call enhancers and runners
directly on the action, without using `use` or `run`.

In this release, we are removing the extensions and this way of running
enhancers and runners. This change has two main reasons:

- TypeScript does not support higher kinded types (HKT), and extensions
  typing must be maintained aside from the function definition. This
  make maintaining enhancers and runners functions hard and error-prone.
- Extensions will increase the build size without that much benefit and are
  against Foscia functional programming approach.

You can replace those builder pattern calls by the functional programming
approach. Here is an example:

```typescript
// highlight.addition
import { query, all } from '@foscia/core';

const posts = await action()
  // highlight.deletion
  .query(Post).all();
// highlight.addition
  .run(query(Post), all());
```

If you are using some special types, such as `Action`,
`ContextEnhancer` (renamed `AnonymousEnhancer`) or
`ContextRunner` (renamed `AnonymousRunner`),
you should remove the extension generic type.

```typescript
// highlight.deletion
import { Action, ContextEnhancer, ConsumeModel } from '@foscia/core';
// highlight.addition
import { Action, AnonymousEnhancer, ConsumeModel } from '@foscia/core';
// highlight.deletion
type CustomAction = Action<ConsumeModel, {}>;
// highlight.addition
type CustomAction = Action<ConsumeModel>;
// highlight.deletion
type CustomEnhancer = ContextEnhancer<{}, any, ConsumeModel>;
// highlight.addition
type CustomEnhancer = AnonymousEnhancer<{}, ConsumeModel>;
```

> When TypeScript will provide higher kinded types, this feature will
> probably be restored.

### Common: dependencies types and other types have been renamed

**Likelihood Of Impact: High**

To unify Foscia types definition, main dependencies types names have changed.
If you are using those, you must use the new names:

- `RegistryI` to `ModelsRegistry`
- `CacheI` to `InstancesCache`
- `AdapterResponseI` to `AdapterResponse`
- `AdapterI` to `Adapter`
- `DeserializerI` to `Deserializer`
- `SerializerI` to `Serializer`

In addition, some other types have been renamed:

- `ContextEnhancer` to `AnonymousEnhancer`
- `ContextRunner` to `AnonymousRunner`

### Common: dependencies factories functions signature changed

**Likelihood Of Impact: High**

`makeCache` and `makeRegistry` are now returning agnostic objects
(`InstancesCache` and `ModelsRegistry`) instead of real implementations.

`weakRefManager` is now a factory function named `makeWeakRefManager`.

`makeMapRegistryWith` have been renamed to `makeMapRegistry` and some
functions signatures have been simplified with fewer features (no more
async model resolving and register method).

`makeHttpAdapter` now use a default query params serializer (the simple one).
As a consequence, `paramsSerializer` export have been removed.

In addition, multiple factories functions have been renamed:

- `makeRefsCacheWith` to `makeRefsCache`
- `makeHttpAdapterWith` and `makeHttpAdapter` merged to `makeHttpAdapter`
- `makeSerializerWith` to `makeSerializer`
- `makeDeserializerWith` to `makeDeserializer`
- `makeJsonRestAdapter` and `makeRestAdapterWith` merged to `makeRestAdapter`
- `makeJsonRestSerializer` to `makeRestSerializer`
- `makeJsonRestDeserializer` to `makeRestDeserializer`

### HTTP: transformers replaced with middlewares

**Likelihood Of Impact: High**

To provide a simpler API and improve maintainability, HTTP adapter's and
request's transformers have been replaced by middlewares.
Instead of `requestTransformers`, `responseTransformers` and `errorTransformers`,
you should now use `middlewares`.

```typescript
import { onRunning } from '@foscia/core';

makeHttpAdapter({
// highlight.deletion
  requestTransformers: [(request) => {
// highlight.deletion
    // Transform request...
// highlight.deletion
    return request;
// highlight.deletion
  }],
// highlight.deletion
  responseTransformers: [(response) => {
// highlight.deletion
    // Transform response...
// highlight.deletion
    return response;
// highlight.deletion
  }],
// highlight.deletion
  errorTransformers: [(error) => {
// highlight.deletion
    // Transform error...
// highlight.deletion
    return error;
// highlight.deletion
  }],
// highlight.addition
  middlewares: [async (request, next) => {
// highlight.addition
    // Transform request...
// highlight.addition
    try {
// highlight.addition
      const response = await next(request);
// highlight.addition
      // Transform response...
// highlight.addition
      return response;
// highlight.addition
    } catch (error) {
// highlight.addition
      // Transform error...
// highlight.addition
      throw error;
// highlight.addition
    }
// highlight.addition
  }],
});
```

### Actions: hooks events now provide action instead of context

**Likelihood Of Impact: Medium**

Action hooks events now provide an action property instead of a context
property, because this might lead to outdated context values.

If your action hooks are using the context, you can still access it using
`useContext` on the action provided in the event:

```typescript
import { onRunning } from '@foscia/core';

action.use(onRunning(async (event) => {
// highlight.deletion
  console.log(event.context);
// highlight.addition
  console.log(await event.action.useContext());
}));
```

### Models: properties definition are now defined using factories

**Likelihood Of Impact: Medium**

Previous properties definition objects (such as `attr()`, etc.) have been
replaced by properties definition factories.
Instead of returning a direct object, those functions now return a factory
to create the final property definition. This will provide more polyvalent
model's properties in the future (such as memoized properties, etc.). As a
consequence, many internal types of Foscia changed.

In most usages of Foscia this will not have any impact, but if you are using
an internal API on properties definition, you may have to change your code.

### Common: internal APIs are now tagged and may have changed

**Likelihood Of Impact: Medium**

Since its release, lots of Foscia APIs were missing their documentation, even
important notes like `@internal` or `@experimental` features.
All packages have been revised and all types, functions or objects
are now correctly documented. Some internal or experimental types or functions
may have been renamed or removed.

If you are using an internal APIs, you should avoid using them or
[open an issue to request the API to be publicly maintained](https://github.com/foscia-dev/foscia/issues/new/choose).

### Models: custom transformers must use `makeCustomTransformer`

**Likelihood Of Impact: Low**

To improve attributes and relations factories' parameters typologies,
transformers are now special Foscia objects, like models, instances, etc.
This has no impact to transformer created using `makeTransformer`, but you
must now use a factory when defining totally custom transformers.
This is made possible with `makeCustomTransformer`:

```typescript
// highlight.addition
import { makeCustomTransformer } from '@foscia/core';

// highlight.deletion
export default {
// highlight.deletion
  deserialize: (value: string | null) => {
// highlight.addition
export default makeCustomTransformer(
// highlight.addition
  (value: string | null) => {
    if (value === null) {
      return null;
    }

    const date = new Date();
    date.setTime(Date.parse(value));

    return date;
  },
// highlight.addition
  (value: Date | null) => (value ? value.toISOString() : null),
// highlight.addition
);
// highlight.deletion
  serialize: (value: Date | null) => (value ? value.toISOString() : null),
// highlight.deletion
};
```

### Actions: `makeRefsCache` manager is replaced by references factories

To simplify the code for reference holding inside the cache, the `manager`
config option of `makeRefsCache` have been replaced by a `makeRef` option.
In addition, `makeWeakRefManager` is replaced by `makeWeakRefFactory`.

```typescript
// highlight.deletion
import { makeWeakRefManager } from '@foscia/core';
// highlight.addition
import { makeWeakRefFactory } from '@foscia/core';

makeRefsCache({
// highlight.deletion
  manager: makeWeakRefManager(),
// highlight.addition
  makeRef: makeWeakRefFactory(),
});
```

### Actions: serializer functions signature changed to use snapshots

**Likelihood Of Impact: Low**

`makeSerializer` and all associated functions or types are now serializing
instances' snapshots instead of instances. This provides a more consistent
attributes and relations serialization and operation in time-critic systems.

If you are directly using the serializer, you should use the new call signature
and provide snapshots instead of instances. If you are using a custom
serializer, you must change your implementation to match the signature
requirements.

```typescript
// highlight.deletion
serializer.serializeInstance(instance, context)
// highlight.addition
serializer.serializeToRecords(takeSnapshot(instance), context)
```

### Models: `$model` property of snapshots is replaced by `$instance`

**Likelihood Of Impact: Low**

To better represent where a snapshot is coming from, the `$model` property
have been replaced by an `$instance` property. If you are using this property
on a snapshot, you can just access the `$model` of the `$instance`.

```typescript
import { takeSnapshot } from '@foscia/core';

const snapshot = takeSnapshot(post);

// highlight.deletion
console.log(snapshot.$model);
// highlight.addition
console.log(snapshot.$instance.$model);
```
